  News    Publication Date: 08 April 2003

 The Iraq crisis - Special report updated daily  Home Delivery Privileges - member offers  Belfast Telegraph Golf Club - Play more


Anti-war protesters keep their distance

By David Gordon


 Anti-war protesters from Northern Ireland, the Republic and Great Britain are stopped by police outside Hillsborough AS ANTI-IMPERIALIST protests go, it was a fairly good-natured affair.

Thousands of anti-war demonstrators assembled in the Sprucefield car park yesterday evening and made their way up the A1 towards Hillsborough.

A rally was held close to the roundabout outside the village. It was well out of earshot of Hillsborough Castle, where the Bush-Blair summit was about to start.

A number of protesters filed past the rally and headed for the village itself. Unsurprisingly, their way was blocked by the security forces.

Estimates of the demonstration turnout ranged from 3,000 to 5,000 approximately.

The numbers were boosted by buses from Great Britain and the Republic.

Many marchers waved makeshift placards. "War Criminal in Belfast," read one while another proclaimed "Barbaric US imperialism. It hasn't gone away you know."

One hand-written message warned: "Iraq 2003 - Vietnam for slow learners."

Marchers included members of Left wing organisations and a number of trade unions.

Also taking part were pressure groups Friends of the Earth and Amnesty International.

Friends of the Earth's Declan Allison said: "We are opposed to this war because of the long-term human and environmental cost.

"It's clearly a war for oil which just shows America's dependence on fossil fuels. Clearly, it should be investing in renewable energy."

A woman from Belfast, who didn't want to be named, said: "This war is not happening in our name. It's not acceptable that George Bush is here trying to behave as if he is a peacemaker. He is not a welcome guest."

Teenager Evelyn O'Rourke, from Offaly, came up by bus to Hillsborough to register her disgust at the war.

"It's not every day that George Bush comes to Northern Ireland. It's just an opportunity that we couldn't miss," she said.

Among the trade unions present was the Union of Communication Workers. Helping to carry its banner was Belfast representative Dessie Murray.

"Our union has opposed the war from the start," he said. "We believe weapons of mass destruction were an issue of mass distraction."


