WHITE HOUSE NOTEBOOK: Bush flies over Belfast, does not see war protests

SHAWN POGATCHNIK, Associated Press Writer   Monday, April 7, 2003

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------



(04-07) 14:56 PDT BELFAST, Northern Ireland (AP) --

Opposition to the Iraq war runs strong in Northern Ireland, and it was evident in the streets as President Bush arrived Monday.

A car spray-painted with peace signs, an oversized flower sprouting from its roof, cruised one of Belfast's main boulevards. It bore signs that read "Bomb and kill for peace and prosperity" and "Self-determination for Iraq."

Posters plastered throughout the city showed Bush's face and warned: "War criminal in Belfast."

Bush did not see the signs because he flew over the city in a helicopter, traveling from a military air base to Hillsborough Castle for meetings with British Prime Minister Tony Blair and Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern.

Former President Clinton drew a crowd of 6,000 when he spoke in Belfast in December 2000, but Bush did not plan to visit this city scarred by decades of political and religious violence.

Bush was staying at the estate 12 miles southwest of Belfast.

It has been the setting for countless official meetings over the years, and protesters can generally watch dignitaries coming and going from just outside its gates.

But an unprecedented security blanket descended Monday.

The grand mansion was surrounded by high corrugated-iron fencing that made it look more like a British army base.

Fleets of armored white Land-Rovers filled with anti-riot police deployed on approach roads, and officers barred most traffic from entering. Some parents argued with police for the right to pick their kids up from the local elementary school, and local businesses worried about being stuck in a ghost town for two days.

"We have staff to pay, rates (taxes) to pay, and we're just being told nobody will be coming into town for two days," complained a local pharmacist, Jeffrey Reaney, gesturing out to Hillsborough's empty main street.

About 2,000 anti-war activists could get only to within about three-quarters of a mile of the castle. They blew whistles, shouted anti-war slogans and sang songs.

No violence occurred during the demonstration, as police closed half of a four-lane highway so the demonstrators could march down it, then stood behind plastic shields to block the narrow road leading into the village where the castle is located.

"The point of this protest was to show Bush and Blair that they're not welcome on this island," said protest organizer Aoife Ni Fhearghail, 25. "It's disgraceful that the citizens of Belfast weren't allowed to march to Hillsborough Castle to make their point clear."

In Londonderry, Northern Ireland's second-largest city and birthplace of Northern Ireland's modern "troubles," protesters hostile to the war seized two of the city's major monuments to get their message across.

There was also a rally in support of the Iraq war.

About 500 people, mostly Protestants, gathered around the Cenotaph at Belfast City Hall, a monument honoring British military dead from the two world wars. Waving the Stars and Stripes as well as their local Union Jacks, the crowd prayed for the safety of British and U.S. military personnel deployed in Iraq.

Special prayers were offered for two members of the Irish Guards killed Sunday as British forces stormed into Basra, the major city in southern Iraq, after a two-week standoff.

"We want to show in a public and dignified manner our support for what it is they are doing and pray for their safe return," said Sir John Gorman, 80, who won a Military Cross -- the British army's second-highest honor -- when he ordered his own damaged British tank to ram a German tank in the battle for Normandy in 1944.


